From Hanselman it's dot com.
It's Hanselman. It's a weekly
discussion with web developer and
technologists. Scott Hanselman hosted by
Carl Franklin. This is Lawrence Ryan announcing
show number 40 recorded Monday,
November 6th, 2006. Support for Hansel minutes
is provided by COVID Smith
tools, makers of code Smith,
extensible template based code generator
for.net. Hanselman is listeners. Get
$100 off code Smith professional
with coupon code H M
100. online@covidsmithtools.com. Support is also
provided by dotnet developers journal.
The world's leading.net developer magazine
online at www dot
dot com. In this episode,
Scott and Carl discuss software
architecture from tech ed in
Barcelona. Hi, this is Carl Franklin
and you're listening to Hansel
minutes from Hanselman it's dot
com. Scott and I are
here in Barcelona, Spain, Barcelona,
Barcelona, protect ed Europe, developer.
Yeah, it's good that you're
here. Otherwise we wouldn't have
a show this week. That
is pretty cool. You're absolutely
right. It would have been
a wake up at three
in the morning and call
you in the hotel kind
of thing. Where, where are
we now? We're sitting on
the bringing foods. He was
sort of out in the
conference where in the middle
of the action, trying to
get that live on the
scene sound and we definitely
got it. They're just, they
just pushed some food by
and we've got cookies and
coffee and bananas everywhere and
sitting outside the breakout sessions
right now. Yeah. So what
are you talking about here?
I'm actually giving a preconference
talk. I'm here with Ron
Jacobs and we're doing software
architecture, architecture. We're doing basically
a day of architecture. We
talking about essentials of architecture.
I'm doing the essential abilities
of the architect. What an
architect really kind of needs
to know to be an
effective architect. Ron's then going
to talk about architectural analysis
and then I'm actually architecture
podcast as he not, he
does it's called arc cast.
If you go up to
channel nine.msdn.com and on the
left side there, he's got
like 136 of them. Wow.
I was feeling really not
superior, but really positive about
how many, you know, we'd
done like 35 shows. And
I was thinking like, you
know, Bob Barker, the guy
from terrific. He just retired
last week after doing like
6,500 shows. Now I'm like,
well, I've reached 35 and
be able to get to
50 and that'll be cool.
And I go, and I
see it, Ron's guy 140
and I'm like, Oh, well,
but he's paid to do
that full time. And we
do this in our spare
time. So that's different thing.
So, you know, so what's
on the agenda. Well, on
the agenda for my stuff,
we're talking about essential abilities.
So we kind of talk
about security, performance and availability.
And we talk about how
architecture is often kind of
mistaken, I think, or given
a bad name as a
soft skill, right. Basically architecture,
right? A lot of word
documents and developers Ignore them.
Yeah. It's sort of seen
by developers is a job
that somebody could bully their
way into, right? Yeah. It
seems like it's kind of
a BS job that you
hang out, you live in
your ivory tower and then
dogma or word documents kind
of like in the form
of word documents. Hi, thou
shalt architect from somebody who
doesn't understand developers. Y I,
I think, and we, and
moron, and I kind of
propose in this, in this,
this day of preconference talks,
that architecture is a little
bit more than that. It's
more of a, a 20,000
foot view. And while there
are people who don't think
that architecture has a direct
correlation is between software and
actually architecting buildings. I think
it's actually a pretty decent
analogy. I think that if
you think about an architect
is building a building, he
may not be necessarily the
kind of guy who knows
how to do his own
plumbing and do his own
wiring, but he needs to
know what the building codes
are for. Correct wiring, how
to design a building such
that appropriate pipes and wires
can be put down. So
while you would hope that
an architect would be able
to do some amount of
configuring his own TCP IP
stack, certainly he would need
to understand how firewalls interact
with software, how network cards
work, if not at the
lowest level, there is a,
there's a high level understanding
just like a pilot of
a plane, right? It needs
to understand the fundamentals of
flying if they may not
understand the fundamentals of how
to jet. So do you
think developers make the best
art? Well, that's a real
tough one. I do personally
think that, you know, it,
it would be nice if
you were a pilot of
an airplane who started out
as a mechanic. Right. I
don't think it's required, but
yeah, because I've seen a
lot of MBAs turn into
architects. Yeah. I do think
that there is going to
be a fundamental missing piece
that will nail you at
some point, you really come
at it from two different
angles. Right. You know, I'm
always a fan of the
little guy who comes up
sure. As opposed to from
the top down, If you're,
you know, if you're a
developer, who's got a big
picture mentality, you know, you're,
you're not, you're, you're not
just doing your little piece
of coding, you're designing and
doing your own architecture on
the fly. One thing I
do think is as a
rough thing that one of
the guys mentioned at the
talk is that he said,
well, I'm allowed to do
architecture 40% of the time.
And my boss expects me
to code 60% of the
time. So that makes me
think that his boss doesn't
really understand the fundamentals of
architecture and how much stuff
needs to be involved. You
have to be thinking about
every, at every level. So
that's one of the things
that we've been talking about
is like security. Like how
do I systematically manage security
into my system at every
level architects? I think if
they are explicitly called out
as architects and the project
understands that so-and-so is the
project architect, this is an
individual who can explain, not
just to the developers, but
also to the why we
need to think about security
ahead of time. We need
to think about performance ahead
of time. So we're talking
about that. We've talking about
things like threat modeling, threat
modeling is an important step
that I'm seeing more and
more, but there's just not
enough, right? Not enough. People
are doing threat modeling, sitting
down and actually saying All
the surfaces are exactly it's
what happened. Yeah. For example,
things like reducing attack, surface
doing defense in depth, really
thinking about what we're actually,
I'm gonna take a pause
here because we're here at
tech ed and his eight,
some of these random tech
ed guys taking a picture
of us. Cause he saw
two nerds with microphones. So
must have pictures. Yeah. Nerds.
They must be doing something
interesting. So we're talking about
things about reducing the attack
surface, right. And we have
some pretty good examples. Actually.
There was a, an interesting
web dev security exploit about
four years ago, Web dev
being the exchange. Exactly. And
also what SharePoint uses to
talk to the backend. And
we talk about how this
particular exploit was not, did
not exist it, but did
not necessarily affect windows 2003.
They had to patch NT
for it, a patch 2000
new patch XP. And the
reason was many fold because
they had put in a
layered architecture inside of windows
two or 2003. So for
example, there was that big
security push. Remember when Microsoft
stopped everything and started doing
security stuff, they patched a
number of things in the
underlying DLLs, but let's assume
that they didn't, , isn't
even running by default on
2003. So if you ordinarily
to turn that off, you
have to harden the server
yourself who locked it all
down, it locked it down,
but a fault. So let's
just say that they didn't,
well, even if it was
running web dev, isn't enabled,
that's one of the things
about , you know, you
have to, I've deployed a
number. I a six rather
I have to put a
number of things and said,
why isn't this working? Oh,
I got to turn on
asp.net off by default off
by default. So even if
it was on by default,
the maximum length of an
Earl is 16 K, which
I think is still too
long, you needed 64 plus
K two to get this
particular exploit. And even if
that was long enough, they
had the special buffer overflow
code switch when they compiled
the C plus plus. So
the system would have halted
that process if it detected
an overflow. And even if
it didn't and if they
did succeed to execute malicious
code, it would have occurred
under a least privileged account.
So there's an example of
six different layers where security
is preventing that exploit from
Happening. Yeah. That was it
getting in the way of,
of real progress of real
code. What's the most, what's
the most secure system, right?
It's when it's unplugged or
shut off that's right. And
that's really kind of the
thing. It is very difficult
to design and architect a
system that is both very,
very usable. Very, very secure.
Yes. But it really, it
comes down to understanding the
requirements. What is the system
to do and make it
as secure as it possibly
can while still allowing people
to do their jobs. Right.
One of the things we
have to do at Kilian
is designed systems that can't
be hacked by people who
work for the bank that
we're designing for. That's a
pretty good criteria. Yeah. So
let's imagine a guy has
the essay password, right? How
do you prevent things against
that guy? Wow. Right. So,
you know, doing things like
encrypting users' passwords, different for
every user, as opposed to
using master keys for everything.
Just so worst he could
do is cause himself pain.
But no one else, stuff
like that, keeping systems really,
really locked down. We're working
on some stuff at Kirlian
now where people will not
have remote desktop access to
boxes. Like they'll only be
administrative over a single port,
stuff like that. Reducing the
attack surface of the overall
Typically react in a negative
way when you take away
their freedoms, don't they? So,
I mean, this is a
being an architect and communicating
with developers and having those
meetings to say, yeah, I'm
going to have to deescalate
your privileges. Yeah. That'd be
good. Yeah. Right. I think
that Vista will make that
easier because you can always
become admin. You can blame
the Z issue with, with
not running as admin on
an XP is that often
you're a, they don't give
you the admin password. That's
different than I think what,
what Vista has done, which
is the just-in-time admin, right.
Use your access control, be
admin. When I need to.
I think that makes a
difference. I think that's much
better. One of the other
things that we talk about
in this particular session is
availability and the concept of
sequential dependencies, that the idea
is that you've got all
these different layers in your
system and your system is
only as available as the
least available piece. Right? So
if you've got a database
server, a network web server
or a desktop, and they're
all say 95, 96, 98%
available, you have to do
the math. You have to
actually multiply those availability numbers
by each other. And you
end up saying, well, I've
got a database server that's
98% available and a network
and a web server. In
this example here using four
different layers. I came up
with an availability number of
around 90%. So even though
each item had saleability numbers
in excess of 96%, the,
the net availability was less
than 90. But then if
you take some of the
fundamentals of availability and you
add like a redundant server
in this instance, I'll say,
I'll, I'll add another database
server with Andy 8% uptime.
I can raise the availability
of the entire system by
in this case, 2% by
just adding another box, seems
like it's kind of dry,
but it would actually allow
dry topic, but it would
allow you to go to
a boss and say, I
can get your availability numbers
up 2%, and it's gonna
cost you five grand for
the server and this much,
that da, da, da. Right?
So the idea being that
an architect needs to be
able to go to the
business owner and putting numbers
on solutions and say, I
can't guarantee you three nines
of uptime without this much
money. And that really helps
the business owners make the
right of decisions. You know,
the, the architecture gig is
sort of been touted by,
you know, people in the
industry as a cure for,
you know, job security as
a developer. Cause you know,
a lot of development that
has been outsourced it's come
back and it goes, comes
and goes, but outsourcing is
always a threat to, you
know, the developer, but architecture
is something that we, we
tend to keep in house.
Would you agree? Yeah, I
think you're right. Not because
it's necessarily for job security,
but I think that the
architect really is that bridge
between the business owner or
the product owner and, and
the team, certainly one could,
could outsource an architect if
the architect oversees really where
we are overseas, if the
architect really had an understanding
of the business. Right. So
I don't think that it's
your, your, your job proofed
your, your, your, your, your
outside. Do you know of
any outsourced architecture gay? I
don't personally, but I'm sure
that there haven't heard of
any. I know that there's,
you know, this is a
thing there's a lot of
smart people in the world.
It'd be interesting to know
if they're a company other
than some of these global
things like IBM, certainly IBM
global consulting has architects everywhere
where they specialize in outsourcing
architectural level stuff. I don't
know. I bet you there
is. And we'll hear from
him, You know, if you
know of any, send them
to us, let us know
Places like ThoughtWorks will travel
all over the world and
work on thought. And IBM,
you know, but building an
entire practice of architects would
require deep understanding, not only
of just general.net stuff or
general Java stuff, but like
in my instance, banking, you
know, we, we met with
a number of large banks
this last week, my boss
and I, the CTO were
flying all over the place.
And we always talk to
them about engaging with us,
not just at my level
at the architect level, but
we call solutions architect level.
Sometimes the banks will say,
Oh, we want Scott. He's
the chief architect. He should
be able to talk about
this. Right. But I haven't
personally coded against a Hogan
mainframe, but I've got a
half a dozen guys at
Carilion that do that are
solutions, architects that know how
to make these things happen.
So within architecture itself, there
are, there are different specializations.
I'm certainly not the guy
to architect to design. Here's
where we get from architecture
into design. Right? Yeah. I'm
not going to design a
database, but I can architect
a system that includes a
database, which calls back to
the, the construction example. Right.
I really shouldn't be laying
the, laying the cords out
and putting the, putting the
pipe down. Right. But I
do have an understanding of
some of the regulatory and
compliance issues and the permits
that are going to be
required to do that kind
of work. And that's kind
of the essence of what
we're talking about. Are you
talking about in your, in
your talk here, which is
coming right up, Actually I
need to get going. It's
going to start pretty soon.
We're also going to talk
about kind of the essentials
that one requires for an
architecture review. You're doing things
like viability assessments and all
the different ilities that one
requires. So like functionalities and,
and reliability eligibility. There's an
ISO standard is ISO 91,
26 that talks about designing
an architecture and functionality, reliability,
usability efficiency, led  maintainability
and portability, all different things
that a good architecture should
potentially meet. Did we talk
about all the different things
that want you to keep
track of? Sometimes it becomes
a little dry because it's
an ISO standard. It's really
just a glorified checklist with
a document behind it. Right.
But actually in the talk
that I'll be doing in
about 10 minutes here, we
talk about all these different
entities and then I apply
them to the iPod to
see is the iPod an
example of good architectural quality?
Is it functional? Is it
reliable? Is it mature? Is
it usable? Is it usable?
Is it maintainable? And what's
the verdict? Well, it's actually
pretty darn good. It's a
pretty awesome product. Certainly hits
on like what version five
now sort of certainly, if
any of the action, if
only I had a version
five iPod, maybe one of
the listeners would like to
take pity on me and
send me an iPod to
replace my, my sad, my
next generation iPod, or what
is it? Generation three. This
is the ancient iPod. From
two years ago, it died
on the plane. It started
screaming. I don't know what
happened. The little hard drive
inside just started screaming. And
now I have these sad
iMac as touched at iPod
face. Jeff , who is
the engineer for dotnet rocks.
And he's on Mondays too.
He told a story on
Mondays about his, I think
it was a creative Zen.
Yeah. You know, those things.
Yeah. That's the competitor wasn't
even a creative Zan. It
was before that it was
some, some of the things
that are Rio Rio. That
was it. The real carbon.
That was the thing. Yeah.
So he had a real
karma and it started doing
this click, click, click, click,
click, click, click, click, click,
click, click stuff. He goes
on the web and he
finds out that the solution
to this is to hold
it in your left hand
and slam it a certain
way into the Palm of
your right hand or vice
versa. If you're left handed
right handed and do this
and repeatedly, and then it
will boot up because the
head was sticking and he
fixed it and he fixed
it. He like booted it
up and see. So he
followed the recommended procedures for
fixing this. Exactly. That would
be under the bullet re
reliability sub bullet recoverability, recoverability,
architected for recoverability smack it
hard enough. And it will
eventually come back. That's right.
All right, Scott. Good luck
with your talk and I
appreciate it. We'll see you
next week on Hanselman. Sorry.
Bye. Bye. Bye.